docs/arch-docs/architecture-highlevel.md, before:

# True Cognitive Memory System Architecture Plan

## Executive Overview

This document presents the architectural plan for implementing a true cognitive memory system for Large Language Models. The system transcends traditional retrieval mechanisms by modeling human cognitive processes, enabling associative thinking, serendipitous connections, and emergent insights through multi-dimensional memory representation and dynamic activation patterns.

## System Architecture

The cognitive memory system consists of six interconnected components that work in concert to create genuine cognitive capabilities. Each component serves a specific function while contributing to the overall emergent intelligence of the system.

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Input Layer"
        EXP[Experience Input]
    end

    subgraph "Memory Formation"
        MDE[Multi-Dimensional Encoder]
        HMS[Hierarchical Memory Storage]
        DMS[Dual Memory System]
    end

    subgraph "Cognitive Processing"
        CAE[Context-Driven Activation Engine]
        BDM[Bridge Discovery Mechanism]
    end

    subgraph "Learning System"
        MLC[Meta-Learning Controller]
        CSE[Cognitive State Evolution]
    end

    subgraph "Output Layer"
        CMO[Cognitive Memory Output]
    end

    EXP --> MDE
    MDE --> HMS
    HMS --> DMS
    HMS --> CAE
    CAE --> BDM
    BDM --> CSE
    CSE --> MLC
    MLC --> MDE
    CSE --> CMO
    BDM --> CMO

    style MDE fill:#4a90e2
    style HMS fill:#5ac8fa
    style DMS fill:#007aff
    style CAE fill:#ff9500
    style BDM fill:#ff3b30
    style MLC fill:#34c759
    style CSE fill:#32d74b
```

## Core Components

### Multi-Dimensional Memory Encoder

The foundation of the system lies in its ability to encode experiences as rich, multi-dimensional vectors. Unlike traditional embeddings that capture only semantic meaning, this encoder extracts multiple dimensions from each experience including semantic, emotional, temporal, contextual, and social aspects. The encoder transforms raw interactions into high-dimensional vectors in ℝᵈ space, where each dimension represents a different facet of the memory. This multi-modal encoding enables the system to capture the full richness of human-like memory formation.

### Hierarchical Memory Storage

To address computational complexity while maintaining cognitive authenticity, the system organizes memories in a three-tier hierarchy. The conceptual layer (L0) contains high-level abstractions such as authentication, performance, or debugging concepts. The contextual layer (L1) holds mid-level scenarios like specific debugging sessions or optimization tasks. The episodic layer (L2) stores detailed memories of specific experiences with their full contextual richness. This hierarchical structure enables O(log n) retrieval complexity through efficient traversal while maintaining the ability to access detailed memories when needed.

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Hierarchical Memory Structure"
        L0[L0: Concepts<br/>High-level abstractions]
        L1[L1: Contexts<br/>Mid-level scenarios]
        L2[L2: Episodes<br/>Specific experiences]

        L0 --> L1
        L1 --> L2
    end

    style L0 fill:#e8f1ff
    style L1 fill:#c8e1ff
    style L2 fill:#a8d1ff
```

### Dual Memory System

The architecture implements a biologically-inspired dual memory system that mirrors human episodic and semantic memory. Episodic memory stores recent, specific interactions with full contextual detail and implements fast decay rates measured in days to weeks. Semantic memory contains distilled patterns and generalized knowledge with slow decay rates extending to months or years. The memory consolidation process continuously identifies recurring patterns in episodic memories and promotes frequently accessed patterns to semantic memory while compressing source episodes to maintain efficiency.

### Context-Driven Activation Engine

This component implements the core cognitive retrieval mechanism through activation spreading and resonance. Rather than simple similarity matching, the engine generates context vectors from the current cognitive state and implements sparse activation networks for computational efficiency. The activation spreads iteratively through memory connections, identifying three types of memories: core memories with high direct similarity, peripheral memories with moderate activation, and bridge memories that enable serendipitous connections.

### Bridge Discovery Mechanism

The system's ability to generate "aha moments" emerges from the sophisticated bridge discovery mechanism. This component identifies memories with low direct similarity to the current context but high connection potential through intermediate memories. Using attention-based probabilistic sampling instead of exhaustive search, it computes bridge quality scores based on novelty, connection strength, and relevance potential. This mechanism enables the kind of unexpected connections that characterize human creativity and insight.

### Meta-Learning Controller

The meta-learning controller enables continuous improvement of the memory system. It tracks successful retrieval patterns and outcomes, adjusting dimension weights based on effectiveness and updating encoding strategies for improved memory formation. This component ensures that the system becomes more effective over time, learning which dimensions are most important for different types of memories and which connection patterns lead to valuable insights.

## Key Interactions and Relationships

The system operates through several primary information flows that create its cognitive capabilities. New experiences flow from the encoder through the hierarchical storage system, where they are placed at appropriate levels and connected to existing memories. The current context generates query vectors that trigger activation spreading through the memory network, retrieving relevant memories across all three categories. These retrieved memories then influence the current cognitive state, creating an iterative process that enables genuine cognitive flow.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant E as Experience
    participant MDE as Multi-Dimensional Encoder
    participant HMS as Hierarchical Storage
    participant CAE as Activation Engine
    participant BDM as Bridge Discovery
    participant CSE as Cognitive Evolution
    participant MLC as Meta-Learning

    E->>MDE: Raw experience
    MDE->>HMS: Multi-dimensional vector
    Note over HMS: Store in appropriate hierarchy level

    loop Cognitive Iteration
        CAE->>HMS: Context query
        HMS->>CAE: Activated memories
        CAE->>BDM: Check for bridges
        BDM->>CSE: Bridge memories + insights
        CSE->>CAE: Updated context
        CSE->>MLC: Success patterns
    end

    MLC->>MDE: Encoding adjustments
```

## Mathematical Framework

The system implements the mathematical framework through several key mechanisms. Memory encoding uses the function E: Experience → ℝᵈ, where each memory vector combines weighted contributions from different modalities. The activation spreading algorithm implements iterative propagation through connection strengths, with activation at time τ calculated as a combination of decay from previous activation and spreading from connected memories. Bridge discovery uses attention mechanisms to efficiently identify promising connections without exhaustive search, computing bridge probability as the product of attention scores, novelty scores, and relevance potential.

## Implementation Phasing

### Phase 1: Foundation (Weeks 1-4)

The initial phase establishes the core infrastructure with basic multi-dimensional encoding capabilities. This phase implements simple episodic and semantic memory stores with basic consolidation mechanisms. The retrieval system uses cosine similarity with recency bias to provide functional memory capabilities while laying the groundwork for more sophisticated mechanisms.

### Phase 2: Cognitive Enhancement (Weeks 5-8)

The second phase introduces the full multi-dimensional encoding system with learned dimension weights. The hierarchical memory organization is deployed, enabling efficient navigation through conceptual, contextual, and episodic layers. Sparse activation networks replace simple similarity matching, creating the foundation for genuine cognitive retrieval.

### Phase 3: Emergent Intelligence (Weeks 9-12)

The final phase implements the attention-based bridge discovery mechanism and deploys the meta-learning controller. This phase enables full cognitive iteration with context evolution, creating a system capable of generating genuine insights through serendipitous connections. The complete system demonstrates emergent cognitive behaviors that mirror human memory and insight generation.

## Critical Design Decisions

The architecture makes several key design decisions to balance computational efficiency with cognitive authenticity. The hierarchical organization reduces search complexity from O(n) to O(log n) while maintaining rich memory representation. Sparse activation networks limit computational overhead while preserving the ability to discover distant connections. Attention-based bridge discovery avoids exhaustive search while maintaining the serendipitous discovery capability essential for genuine insights.

## Conclusion

This cognitive memory architecture represents a fundamental shift from information retrieval to genuine cognitive processing. By implementing mathematical models of human memory mechanisms including multi-dimensional encoding, activation spreading, and bridge discovery, the system enables Large Language Models to develop true associative intelligence. The phased implementation approach ensures practical deployment while maintaining the ambitious vision of creating artificial intelligence systems that think, remember, and discover insights in fundamentally human-like ways.

Commit message:

Remove bridge discovery system and simplify memory to core/peripheral types
  - Delete bridge discovery implementation (SimpleBridgeDiscovery class, 417 lines)
  - Remove bridge_discovery.py and bridge_cache migration (003_bridge_cache.sql)
  - Clean up core system components:
    * Remove BridgeDiscovery interface and BridgeMemory class from cognitive_system.py
    * Remove bridge_discovery parameter from factory functions
    * Remove bridge_discovery_k configuration from config.py and .env.template
  - Update retrieval system to return only core/peripheral memories
  - Remove bridge references from API layers (MCP server, operations, CLI commands)
  - Clean up display formatting for bridge-specific metadata
  - Update all import/export files and remove bridge components from __all__ lists
  - Fix test infrastructure and remove bridge-related test assertions
  - Update architecture documentation to reflect simplified memory system
  - Remove bridge discovery from monitoring and logging systems

  This simplifies the memory system to focus on core/peripheral classification
  while removing the computational overhead of bridge discovery algorithms.
  All tests passing with clean removal of unused functionality.

docs/arch-docs/architecture-highlevel.md, after:

# True Cognitive Memory System Architecture Plan

## Executive Overview

This document presents the architectural plan for implementing a true cognitive memory system for Large Language Models. The system transcends traditional retrieval mechanisms by modeling human cognitive processes, enabling associative thinking, serendipitous connections, and emergent insights through multi-dimensional memory representation and dynamic activation patterns.

## System Architecture

The cognitive memory system consists of six interconnected components that work in concert to create genuine cognitive capabilities. Each component serves a specific function while contributing to the overall emergent intelligence of the system.

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Input Layer"
        EXP[Experience Input]
    end

    subgraph "Memory Formation"
        MDE[Multi-Dimensional Encoder]
        HMS[Hierarchical Memory Storage]
        DMS[Dual Memory System]
    end

    subgraph "Cognitive Processing"
        CAE[Context-Driven Activation Engine]
        MCC[Memory Consolidation Controller]
    end

    subgraph "Learning System"
        MLC[Meta-Learning Controller]
        CSE[Cognitive State Evolution]
    end

    subgraph "Output Layer"
        CMO[Cognitive Memory Output]
    end

    EXP --> MDE
    MDE --> HMS
    HMS --> DMS
    HMS --> CAE
    CAE --> MCC
    MCC --> CSE
    CSE --> MLC
    MLC --> MDE
    CSE --> CMO
    MCC --> CMO

    style MDE fill:#4a90e2
    style HMS fill:#5ac8fa
    style DMS fill:#007aff
    style CAE fill:#ff9500
    style MCC fill:#ff3b30
    style MLC fill:#34c759
    style CSE fill:#32d74b
```

## Core Components

### Multi-Dimensional Memory Encoder

The foundation of the system lies in its ability to encode experiences as rich, multi-dimensional vectors. Unlike traditional embeddings that capture only semantic meaning, this encoder extracts multiple dimensions from each experience including semantic, emotional, temporal, contextual, and social aspects. The encoder transforms raw interactions into high-dimensional vectors in ℝᵈ space, where each dimension represents a different facet of the memory. This multi-modal encoding enables the system to capture the full richness of human-like memory formation.

### Hierarchical Memory Storage

To address computational complexity while maintaining cognitive authenticity, the system organizes memories in a three-tier hierarchy. The conceptual layer (L0) contains high-level abstractions such as authentication, performance, or debugging concepts. The contextual layer (L1) holds mid-level scenarios like specific debugging sessions or optimization tasks. The episodic layer (L2) stores detailed memories of specific experiences with their full contextual richness. This hierarchical structure enables O(log n) retrieval complexity through efficient traversal while maintaining the ability to access detailed memories when needed.

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Hierarchical Memory Structure"
        L0[L0: Concepts<br/>High-level abstractions]
        L1[L1: Contexts<br/>Mid-level scenarios]
        L2[L2: Episodes<br/>Specific experiences]

        L0 --> L1
        L1 --> L2
    end

    style L0 fill:#e8f1ff
    style L1 fill:#c8e1ff
    style L2 fill:#a8d1ff
```

### Dual Memory System

The architecture implements a biologically-inspired dual memory system that mirrors human episodic and semantic memory. Episodic memory stores recent, specific interactions with full contextual detail and implements fast decay rates measured in days to weeks. Semantic memory contains distilled patterns and generalized knowledge with slow decay rates extending to months or years. The memory consolidation process continuously identifies recurring patterns in episodic memories and promotes frequently accessed patterns to semantic memory while compressing source episodes to maintain efficiency.

### Context-Driven Activation Engine

This component implements the core cognitive retrieval mechanism through activation spreading and resonance. Rather than simple similarity matching, the engine generates context vectors from the current cognitive state and implements sparse activation networks for computational efficiency. The activation spreads iteratively through memory connections, identifying two types of memories: core memories with high direct similarity and peripheral memories with moderate activation.

### Memory Consolidation Controller

The system's ability to generate insights emerges from the sophisticated memory consolidation controller. This component manages the transition of memories between episodic and semantic storage, identifying patterns that warrant promotion to long-term semantic memory. It analyzes access patterns and connection strengths to determine which memories should be consolidated and how they should be organized for optimal retrieval.

### Meta-Learning Controller

The meta-learning controller enables continuous improvement of the memory system. It tracks successful retrieval patterns and outcomes, adjusting dimension weights based on effectiveness and updating encoding strategies for improved memory formation. This component ensures that the system becomes more effective over time, learning which dimensions are most important for different types of memories and which connection patterns lead to valuable insights.

## Key Interactions and Relationships

The system operates through several primary information flows that create its cognitive capabilities. New experiences flow from the encoder through the hierarchical storage system, where they are placed at appropriate levels and connected to existing memories. The current context generates query vectors that trigger activation spreading through the memory network, retrieving relevant memories across all three categories. These retrieved memories then influence the current cognitive state, creating an iterative process that enables genuine cognitive flow.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant E as Experience
    participant MDE as Multi-Dimensional Encoder
    participant HMS as Hierarchical Storage
    participant CAE as Activation Engine
    participant MCC as Memory Consolidation
    participant CSE as Cognitive Evolution
    participant MLC as Meta-Learning

    E->>MDE: Raw experience
    MDE->>HMS: Multi-dimensional vector
    Note over HMS: Store in appropriate hierarchy level

    loop Cognitive Iteration
        CAE->>HMS: Context query
        HMS->>CAE: Activated memories
        CAE->>MCC: Check consolidation needs
        MCC->>CSE: Consolidated memories + patterns
        CSE->>CAE: Updated context
        CSE->>MLC: Success patterns
    end

    MLC->>MDE: Encoding adjustments
```

## Mathematical Framework

The system implements the mathematical framework through several key mechanisms. Memory encoding uses the function E: Experience → ℝᵈ, where each memory vector combines weighted contributions from different modalities. The activation spreading algorithm implements iterative propagation through connection strengths, with activation at time τ calculated as a combination of decay from previous activation and spreading from connected memories. Memory consolidation uses pattern analysis to identify recurring themes and promote frequently accessed episodic memories to semantic storage.

## Implementation Phasing

### Phase 1: Foundation (Weeks 1-4)

The initial phase establishes the core infrastructure with basic multi-dimensional encoding capabilities. This phase implements simple episodic and semantic memory stores with basic consolidation mechanisms. The retrieval system uses cosine similarity with recency bias to provide functional memory capabilities while laying the groundwork for more sophisticated mechanisms.

### Phase 2: Cognitive Enhancement (Weeks 5-8)

The second phase introduces the full multi-dimensional encoding system with learned dimension weights. The hierarchical memory organization is deployed, enabling efficient navigation through conceptual, contextual, and episodic layers. Sparse activation networks replace simple similarity matching, creating the foundation for genuine cognitive retrieval.

### Phase 3: Emergent Intelligence (Weeks 9-12)

The final phase implements the advanced memory consolidation mechanism and deploys the meta-learning controller. This phase enables full cognitive iteration with context evolution, creating a system capable of generating genuine insights through pattern recognition and memory organization. The complete system demonstrates emergent cognitive behaviors that mirror human memory and learning processes.

## Critical Design Decisions

The architecture makes several key design decisions to balance computational efficiency with cognitive authenticity. The hierarchical organization reduces search complexity from O(n) to O(log n) while maintaining rich memory representation. Sparse activation networks limit computational overhead while preserving the ability to discover relevant connections. Memory consolidation mechanisms provide efficient pattern recognition while maintaining the discovery capabilities essential for genuine insights.

## Conclusion

This cognitive memory architecture represents a fundamental shift from information retrieval to genuine cognitive processing. By implementing mathematical models of human memory mechanisms including multi-dimensional encoding, activation spreading, and memory consolidation, the system enables Large Language Models to develop true associative intelligence. The phased implementation approach ensures practical deployment while maintaining the ambitious vision of creating artificial intelligence systems that think, remember, and discover insights in fundamentally human-like ways.
