docs/arch-docs/markdown-parsing-architecture.md, before:

# Memory Loading Architecture for Cognitive Memory System

## Overview

This document describes the architecture for loading external content into the cognitive memory system. The design introduces a formal `MemoryLoader` interface that enables pluggable content ingestion from various sources, with markdown documents as the first implementation.

## Architectural Approach

### Memory Loader Interface Pattern

Following the existing interface-driven design, we introduce a new abstraction layer:

```
External Source → MemoryLoader → CognitiveSystem → Storage Layer
                     ↓               ↓
                Parse Content    Orchestrate     → VectorStorage (Qdrant)
                Extract Relations    Storage     → MemoryStorage (SQLite)
                Validate Input                   → ConnectionGraph
```

### Key Architectural Components

1. **MemoryLoader Interface**: Abstract base for all content loaders
2. **MarkdownMemoryLoader**: Coordinator for markdown processing components
3. **Specialized Markdown Components**: Modular processing pipeline
   - **ContentAnalyzer**: Linguistic analysis and content classification
   - **DocumentParser**: Markdown parsing and tree construction
   - **MemoryFactory**: Memory creation and content assembly
   - **ConnectionExtractor**: Relationship analysis between memories
   - **ChunkProcessor**: Document chunking and grouping logic
4. **CognitiveSystem Integration**: Orchestrates loading process
5. **Content Classification Engine**: Determines L0/L1/L2 hierarchy
6. **Relationship Extraction Engine**: Builds connection graph

## Memory Classification Algorithm

### Feature Extraction (using spaCy en_core_web_md)
- `noun_ratio` = nouns / total_tokens
- `verb_ratio` = verbs / total_tokens
- `code_fraction` = code_tokens / total_tokens
- `imperative_score` = detection of command patterns ("Run...", "Install...")
- `header_level` = markdown header depth (0, 1, 2, 3...)

### Classification Rules
```python
if tokens < 5 and header_level ≤ 2:
    return L0  # Concepts (short headers, key terms)
elif code_fraction ≥ 0.60:
    return L2  # Episodes (code blocks)
elif imperative_score > 0.5:
    return L2  # Episodes (commands, procedures)
else:
    # Scoring model
    score_L0 = 1.2×noun_ratio - 0.8×verb_ratio - 0.8×header_level
    score_L2 = 1.0×verb_ratio + 0.7×imperative_score
    score_L1 = middle_ground
    return argmax(scores)
```

## Connection Strength Computation

```python
connection_strength = base_weight × relevance_score

base_weights = {
    'hierarchical': 0.80,  # Header contains subsection
    'sequential': 0.70,    # Step 1 → Step 2
    'associative': 0.50    # Related concepts
}

relevance_score = (
    0.45 × semantic_similarity +      # Cosine similarity
    0.25 × lexical_jaccard +          # Token overlap
    0.15 × structural_proximity +     # Document distance
    0.15 × explicit_references        # Markdown links
)
```

## Chunking Strategy

1. **Primary Split**: Split on `##` headers
2. **Secondary Split**: If chunk >250 tokens, split on `###` headers
3. **Code Extraction**: Pull out code blocks >8 lines as separate chunks
4. **Result**: ~25-35 chunks per 200-line document

## Example: CLAUDE.md Processing

**Input**: `## Development Commands` section
**Chunks Created**:
- `## Development Commands` → L1 Context (procedures)
- `python3 -m venv venv` → L2 Episode (specific command)
- `pytest` → L0 Concept (tool name)

**Connections**:
- L1(Dev Commands) ──0.42(assoc)──► L0(pytest)
- L2(venv command) ──0.56(seq)──► L2(pip install)

## Configuration Integration

Extend existing `CognitiveConfig` in `config.py`:

```python
# Markdown parsing parameters
max_tokens_per_chunk: int = 250
code_block_lines: int = 8
strength_floor: float = 0.15

# Base connection weights
hierarchical_weight: float = 0.80
sequential_weight: float = 0.70
associative_weight: float = 0.50

# Relevance scoring weights (must sum to 1.0)
semantic_alpha: float = 0.45
lexical_beta: float = 0.25
structural_gamma: float = 0.15
explicit_delta: float = 0.15
```

## CLI Interface

New command: `memory_system parse-md <file_path>`

```bash
# Parse single markdown file
memory_system parse-md ./CLAUDE.md

# Parse with custom parameters
memory_system parse-md ./docs/api.md --chunk-size 300 --dry-run

# Batch parse directory
memory_system parse-md ./docs/ --recursive
```

## Implementation Status

### ✅ Completed: Modular Component Architecture
The markdown processing system has been refactored into specialized components:

1. **ContentAnalyzer**: Linguistic analysis, POS tagging, content classification
2. **DocumentParser**: Markdown parsing with hierarchical tree construction
3. **MemoryFactory**: Memory creation, content assembly, and enhancement
4. **ConnectionExtractor**: Semantic similarity, lexical analysis, structural analysis
5. **ChunkProcessor**: Document chunking, grouping, and consolidation
6. **MarkdownMemoryLoader**: Main coordinator delegating to specialized components

### ✅ Completed: Connection Building
1. **Semantic Analysis**: Cosine similarity computation using spaCy
2. **Lexical Analysis**: Jaccard coefficient implementation
3. **Structural Analysis**: Document proximity scoring
4. **Connection Storage**: SQLite memory_connections table integration

### ✅ Completed: Integration & Validation
1. **Memory Ingestion**: Fully integrated with existing storage layer
2. **Configuration**: Extended CognitiveConfig with parsing parameters
3. **Test Coverage**: 53/53 tests passing with comprehensive validation
4. **CLI Enhancement**: Batch processing and dry-run mode available

## Quality Validation

### Test Harness
- **QA Set**: 30-40 natural language queries about markdown content
- **Success Metric**: Top-5 retrieval contains correct answer
- **Activation Metrics**: BFS spread efficiency (10-60 nodes optimal)

### Example Test Queries for CLAUDE.md
- "How do I run tests?" → Should activate L2(pytest command)
- "What is the vector database?" → Should activate L0(Qdrant concept)
- "Development workflow steps?" → Should activate L1(Dev Commands section)

## Dependencies

### Requirements Status

✅ **Already Installed and Configured**:
- spacy (with en_core_web_md model)
- vaderSentiment
- All dependencies integrated in modular architecture

✅ **Component Dependencies**:
- ContentAnalyzer: spacy, vaderSentiment
- DocumentParser: markdown, re
- MemoryFactory: Custom content assembly logic
- ConnectionExtractor: spacy, semantic analysis
- ChunkProcessor: Token counting, content grouping

## System Integration Architecture

### Interface Integration Points

The MemoryLoader architecture integrates cleanly with existing system interfaces:

1. **Interface Layer**: New `MemoryLoader` interface joins existing abstractions (`EmbeddingProvider`, `VectorStorage`, `MemoryStorage`, etc.)

2. **CognitiveSystem Orchestration**: The `CognitiveSystem` interface gains a new method `load_memories_from_source(loader, source_path)` that coordinates the loading process

3. **Storage Layer Reuse**: MemoryLoaders produce `CognitiveMemory` objects that flow through existing storage interfaces without modification

4. **Configuration Integration**: Loading parameters extend the existing `CognitiveConfig` dataclass following current environment variable patterns

### System Flow Integration

```
CLI Command → CognitiveSystem.load_memories_from_source()
                      ↓
            MemoryLoader.load_from_source()
                      ↓
            MemoryLoader.extract_connections()
                      ↓
            Existing Storage Pipeline (VectorStorage + MemoryStorage + ConnectionGraph)
```

### Extensibility Design

The MemoryLoader interface enables future content types:
- `PDFMemoryLoader` for research papers
- `CodeMemoryLoader` for source code repositories
- `ChatMemoryLoader` for conversation logs
- `WebMemoryLoader` for web content

Each loader implements the same interface contract, ensuring consistent integration with the cognitive system.

### CLI Integration

New command integrates with existing `memory_system` CLI:
```bash
memory_system load <source_path> [--loader-type=markdown] [--dry-run]
```

The command delegates to `CognitiveSystem.load_memories_from_source()` with appropriate loader instance, maintaining architectural consistency.

## Architectural Benefits

1. **Interface Consistency**: Follows established patterns from existing 9 interfaces
2. **Component Isolation**: MemoryLoaders are independently testable and swappable
3. **Storage Reuse**: Leverages existing vector and metadata storage without duplication
4. **Configuration Consistency**: Extends current environment-based configuration approach
5. **Future Extensibility**: Clean foundation for additional content types

This architecture maintains the system's interface-driven design principles while adding structured content ingestion capabilities that integrate seamlessly with existing cognitive processing and storage layers.

## Automatic File Change Monitoring

### Overview

The system includes comprehensive automatic markdown file change monitoring that synchronizes markdown files with cognitive memory in real-time. The monitoring system detects markdown file additions, modifications, and deletions, automatically updating the memory system to reflect file system changes.

### Architecture Components

#### Markdown File Monitoring
- **MarkdownFileMonitor**: Polling-based detection specifically for markdown files (`.md`, `.markdown`, `.mdown`, `.mkd`)
- **FileState Tracking**: Monitors file mtime, size, and existence with change detection logic
- **FileChangeEvent System**: Observer pattern with ChangeType enum (ADDED, MODIFIED, DELETED)
- **Cross-platform Compatibility**: Reliable polling approach that works on all operating systems

#### Generic Synchronization Layer
- **FileSyncHandler**: Generic file change synchronization using MemoryLoader interface pattern
- **LoaderRegistry**: Manages and discovers MemoryLoader implementations for different file types
- **Atomic Operations**: Delete+reload pattern with transaction-like error handling for consistency
- **File Type Detection**: Automatic loader selection via `get_supported_extensions()` and `validate_source()`

#### Production Service Integration
- **Container Integration**: Monitoring runs as built-in service within existing `heimdall-mcp` containers
- **Process Management**: Python multiprocessing with PID file tracking and signal handling
- **Health Monitoring**: Service status included in container health check system
- **Resource Management**: Memory/CPU monitoring with configurable thresholds

### Configuration Options

`CognitiveConfig` provides monitoring parameters:

```python
# File monitoring configuration
monitoring_enabled: bool = True
monitoring_interval_seconds: float = 5.0
monitoring_batch_size: int = 10
monitoring_ignore_patterns: Set[str] = {'.git', 'node_modules', '__pycache__'}

# File synchronization configuration
sync_enabled: bool = True
sync_atomic_operations: bool = True
sync_continue_on_error: bool = True
sync_max_retry_attempts: int = 3
sync_retry_delay_seconds: float = 1.0
```

### Memory Source Path Querying

SQLite persistence provides source path querying capabilities:

- **`get_memories_by_source_path()`**: Efficiently query memories by source file path
- **`delete_memories_by_source_path()`**: Atomic deletion of all memories from a specific file
- **JSON Indexing**: Performance-optimized indexes on `context_metadata.source_path` field
- **Partial Indexing**: Only indexes rows where source_path exists for efficiency

### CLI Integration

```bash
# Monitoring service management
memory_system monitor start        # Start monitoring service
memory_system monitor stop         # Stop monitoring service
memory_system monitor restart      # Restart monitoring service
memory_system monitor status       # Check service status
memory_system monitor health       # Detailed health check

# Health check integration
memory_system doctor               # Includes monitoring service validation
```

### Data Flow

```
Container Startup → MonitoringService (daemon) → MarkdownFileMonitor (polling) → FileSyncHandler → CognitiveSystem
                                ↓                                                      ↓
File System Changes → FileChangeEvent → FileSyncHandler → LoaderRegistry → MemoryLoader → Memory Operations
                                ↓
Container Health Check ← Service Status ← Error Recovery ← Statistics Tracking
```

### Component Interaction

The monitoring system uses a three-layer architecture:

1. **Detection Layer**: MarkdownFileMonitor watches for markdown file changes using polling
2. **Coordination Layer**: FileSyncHandler receives change events and orchestrates sync operations
3. **Loading Layer**: LoaderRegistry auto-selects appropriate MemoryLoader for file-to-memory conversion

This separation allows markdown-specific file monitoring while maintaining generic, extensible memory loading capabilities for future file types.

## Modular Component Architecture

### Component Responsibilities

The refactored markdown processing system follows the single responsibility principle with these specialized components:

#### 1. ContentAnalyzer (`content_analyzer.py`)
- **Purpose**: Linguistic analysis and content classification
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Token counting and content validation
  - Code section detection and analysis
  - Memory type classification (conceptual, procedural, contextual)
  - Content meaningfulness assessment
  - spaCy-based linguistic feature extraction

#### 2. DocumentParser (`document_parser.py`)
- **Purpose**: Markdown parsing and hierarchical tree construction
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Markdown header parsing and hierarchy building
  - Document tree construction with proper nesting
  - Position tracking for structural analysis
  - Content extraction and organization

#### 3. MemoryFactory (`memory_factory.py`)
- **Purpose**: Memory creation and content assembly
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Contextual content assembly with hierarchical paths
  - Code context enhancement and merging
  - Memory chunk creation with proper metadata
  - Content truncation and optimization

#### 4. ConnectionExtractor (`connection_extractor.py`)
- **Purpose**: Relationship analysis between memories
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Hierarchical connection detection (parent-child relationships)
  - Sequential connection analysis (step-by-step procedures)
  - Associative connection scoring (semantic similarity)
  - Relevance score calculation using multiple factors

#### 5. ChunkProcessor (`chunk_processor.py`)
- **Purpose**: Document chunking and intelligent grouping
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Tree-to-memory conversion with contextual awareness
  - Intelligent grouping of small sections
  - Memory consolidation and optimization
  - Token threshold management

#### 6. MarkdownMemoryLoader (`markdown_loader.py`)
- **Purpose**: Main coordinator orchestrating all components
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Component initialization and dependency injection
  - High-level processing workflow coordination
  - Interface compliance with MemoryLoader abstract base
  - Error handling and logging coordination

### Component Interaction Flow

```
MarkdownMemoryLoader (Coordinator)
    ↓
DocumentParser → Hierarchical Tree
    ↓
ContentAnalyzer → Content Classification
    ↓
ChunkProcessor → Memory Chunks
    ↓
MemoryFactory → Enhanced Memories
    ↓
ConnectionExtractor → Memory Relationships
    ↓
Return: (memories, connections)
```

### Benefits of Modular Architecture

1. **Single Responsibility**: Each component has a clear, focused purpose
2. **Testability**: Components can be tested independently with mocks
3. **Maintainability**: Changes to one component don't affect others
4. **Reusability**: Components can be reused in different contexts
5. **Extensibility**: New components can be added without affecting existing ones
6. **Code Quality**: Eliminates duplication and reduces complexity

### Backward Compatibility

The refactoring maintains full backward compatibility:
- Public API of MarkdownMemoryLoader remains unchanged
- All existing tests continue to pass (53/53)
- Integration points with CognitiveSystem unchanged
- Configuration parameters remain the same

Commit message:

Add some notes about markdown file monitoring behavior on startup

docs/arch-docs/markdown-parsing-architecture.md, after:

# Memory Loading Architecture for Cognitive Memory System

## Overview

This document describes the architecture for loading external content into the cognitive memory system. The design introduces a formal `MemoryLoader` interface that enables pluggable content ingestion from various sources, with markdown documents as the first implementation.

## Architectural Approach

### Memory Loader Interface Pattern

Following the existing interface-driven design, we introduce a new abstraction layer:

```
External Source → MemoryLoader → CognitiveSystem → Storage Layer
                     ↓               ↓
                Parse Content    Orchestrate     → VectorStorage (Qdrant)
                Extract Relations    Storage     → MemoryStorage (SQLite)
                Validate Input                   → ConnectionGraph
```

### Key Architectural Components

1. **MemoryLoader Interface**: Abstract base for all content loaders
2. **MarkdownMemoryLoader**: Coordinator for markdown processing components
3. **Specialized Markdown Components**: Modular processing pipeline
   - **ContentAnalyzer**: Linguistic analysis and content classification
   - **DocumentParser**: Markdown parsing and tree construction
   - **MemoryFactory**: Memory creation and content assembly
   - **ConnectionExtractor**: Relationship analysis between memories
   - **ChunkProcessor**: Document chunking and grouping logic
4. **CognitiveSystem Integration**: Orchestrates loading process
5. **Content Classification Engine**: Determines L0/L1/L2 hierarchy
6. **Relationship Extraction Engine**: Builds connection graph

## Memory Classification Algorithm

### Feature Extraction (using spaCy en_core_web_md)
- `noun_ratio` = nouns / total_tokens
- `verb_ratio` = verbs / total_tokens
- `code_fraction` = code_tokens / total_tokens
- `imperative_score` = detection of command patterns ("Run...", "Install...")
- `header_level` = markdown header depth (0, 1, 2, 3...)

### Classification Rules
```python
if tokens < 5 and header_level ≤ 2:
    return L0  # Concepts (short headers, key terms)
elif code_fraction ≥ 0.60:
    return L2  # Episodes (code blocks)
elif imperative_score > 0.5:
    return L2  # Episodes (commands, procedures)
else:
    # Scoring model
    score_L0 = 1.2×noun_ratio - 0.8×verb_ratio - 0.8×header_level
    score_L2 = 1.0×verb_ratio + 0.7×imperative_score
    score_L1 = middle_ground
    return argmax(scores)
```

## Connection Strength Computation

```python
connection_strength = base_weight × relevance_score

base_weights = {
    'hierarchical': 0.80,  # Header contains subsection
    'sequential': 0.70,    # Step 1 → Step 2
    'associative': 0.50    # Related concepts
}

relevance_score = (
    0.45 × semantic_similarity +      # Cosine similarity
    0.25 × lexical_jaccard +          # Token overlap
    0.15 × structural_proximity +     # Document distance
    0.15 × explicit_references        # Markdown links
)
```

## Chunking Strategy

1. **Primary Split**: Split on `##` headers
2. **Secondary Split**: If chunk >250 tokens, split on `###` headers
3. **Code Extraction**: Pull out code blocks >8 lines as separate chunks
4. **Result**: ~25-35 chunks per 200-line document

## Example: CLAUDE.md Processing

**Input**: `## Development Commands` section
**Chunks Created**:
- `## Development Commands` → L1 Context (procedures)
- `python3 -m venv venv` → L2 Episode (specific command)
- `pytest` → L0 Concept (tool name)

**Connections**:
- L1(Dev Commands) ──0.42(assoc)──► L0(pytest)
- L2(venv command) ──0.56(seq)──► L2(pip install)

## Configuration Integration

Extend existing `CognitiveConfig` in `config.py`:

```python
# Markdown parsing parameters
max_tokens_per_chunk: int = 250
code_block_lines: int = 8
strength_floor: float = 0.15

# Base connection weights
hierarchical_weight: float = 0.80
sequential_weight: float = 0.70
associative_weight: float = 0.50

# Relevance scoring weights (must sum to 1.0)
semantic_alpha: float = 0.45
lexical_beta: float = 0.25
structural_gamma: float = 0.15
explicit_delta: float = 0.15
```

## CLI Interface

New command: `memory_system parse-md <file_path>`

```bash
# Parse single markdown file
memory_system parse-md ./CLAUDE.md

# Parse with custom parameters
memory_system parse-md ./docs/api.md --chunk-size 300 --dry-run

# Batch parse directory
memory_system parse-md ./docs/ --recursive
```

## Implementation Status

### ✅ Completed: Modular Component Architecture
The markdown processing system has been refactored into specialized components:

1. **ContentAnalyzer**: Linguistic analysis, POS tagging, content classification
2. **DocumentParser**: Markdown parsing with hierarchical tree construction
3. **MemoryFactory**: Memory creation, content assembly, and enhancement
4. **ConnectionExtractor**: Semantic similarity, lexical analysis, structural analysis
5. **ChunkProcessor**: Document chunking, grouping, and consolidation
6. **MarkdownMemoryLoader**: Main coordinator delegating to specialized components

### ✅ Completed: Connection Building
1. **Semantic Analysis**: Cosine similarity computation using spaCy
2. **Lexical Analysis**: Jaccard coefficient implementation
3. **Structural Analysis**: Document proximity scoring
4. **Connection Storage**: SQLite memory_connections table integration

### ✅ Completed: Integration & Validation
1. **Memory Ingestion**: Fully integrated with existing storage layer
2. **Configuration**: Extended CognitiveConfig with parsing parameters
3. **Test Coverage**: 53/53 tests passing with comprehensive validation
4. **CLI Enhancement**: Batch processing and dry-run mode available

## Quality Validation

### Test Harness
- **QA Set**: 30-40 natural language queries about markdown content
- **Success Metric**: Top-5 retrieval contains correct answer
- **Activation Metrics**: BFS spread efficiency (10-60 nodes optimal)

### Example Test Queries for CLAUDE.md
- "How do I run tests?" → Should activate L2(pytest command)
- "What is the vector database?" → Should activate L0(Qdrant concept)
- "Development workflow steps?" → Should activate L1(Dev Commands section)

## Dependencies

### Requirements Status

✅ **Already Installed and Configured**:
- spacy (with en_core_web_md model)
- vaderSentiment
- All dependencies integrated in modular architecture

✅ **Component Dependencies**:
- ContentAnalyzer: spacy, vaderSentiment
- DocumentParser: markdown, re
- MemoryFactory: Custom content assembly logic
- ConnectionExtractor: spacy, semantic analysis
- ChunkProcessor: Token counting, content grouping

## System Integration Architecture

### Interface Integration Points

The MemoryLoader architecture integrates cleanly with existing system interfaces:

1. **Interface Layer**: New `MemoryLoader` interface joins existing abstractions (`EmbeddingProvider`, `VectorStorage`, `MemoryStorage`, etc.)

2. **CognitiveSystem Orchestration**: The `CognitiveSystem` interface gains a new method `load_memories_from_source(loader, source_path)` that coordinates the loading process

3. **Storage Layer Reuse**: MemoryLoaders produce `CognitiveMemory` objects that flow through existing storage interfaces without modification

4. **Configuration Integration**: Loading parameters extend the existing `CognitiveConfig` dataclass following current environment variable patterns

### System Flow Integration

```
CLI Command → CognitiveSystem.load_memories_from_source()
                      ↓
            MemoryLoader.load_from_source()
                      ↓
            MemoryLoader.extract_connections()
                      ↓
            Existing Storage Pipeline (VectorStorage + MemoryStorage + ConnectionGraph)
```

### Extensibility Design

The MemoryLoader interface enables future content types:
- `PDFMemoryLoader` for research papers
- `CodeMemoryLoader` for source code repositories
- `ChatMemoryLoader` for conversation logs
- `WebMemoryLoader` for web content

Each loader implements the same interface contract, ensuring consistent integration with the cognitive system.

### CLI Integration

New command integrates with existing `memory_system` CLI:
```bash
memory_system load <source_path> [--loader-type=markdown] [--dry-run]
```

The command delegates to `CognitiveSystem.load_memories_from_source()` with appropriate loader instance, maintaining architectural consistency.

## Architectural Benefits

1. **Interface Consistency**: Follows established patterns from existing 9 interfaces
2. **Component Isolation**: MemoryLoaders are independently testable and swappable
3. **Storage Reuse**: Leverages existing vector and metadata storage without duplication
4. **Configuration Consistency**: Extends current environment-based configuration approach
5. **Future Extensibility**: Clean foundation for additional content types

This architecture maintains the system's interface-driven design principles while adding structured content ingestion capabilities that integrate seamlessly with existing cognitive processing and storage layers.

## Automatic File Change Monitoring

### Overview

The system includes comprehensive automatic markdown file change monitoring that synchronizes markdown files with cognitive memory in real-time. The monitoring system detects markdown file additions, modifications, and deletions, automatically updating the memory system to reflect file system changes.

### Architecture Components

#### Markdown File Monitoring
- **MarkdownFileMonitor**: Polling-based detection specifically for markdown files (`.md`, `.markdown`, `.mdown`, `.mkd`)
- **FileState Tracking**: Monitors file mtime, size, and existence with change detection logic
- **FileChangeEvent System**: Observer pattern with ChangeType enum (ADDED, MODIFIED, DELETED)
- **Cross-platform Compatibility**: Reliable polling approach that works on all operating systems

#### Generic Synchronization Layer
- **FileSyncHandler**: Generic file change synchronization using MemoryLoader interface pattern
- **LoaderRegistry**: Manages and discovers MemoryLoader implementations for different file types
- **Atomic Operations**: Delete+reload pattern with transaction-like error handling for consistency
- **File Type Detection**: Automatic loader selection via `get_supported_extensions()` and `validate_source()`

#### Production Service Integration
- **Container Integration**: Monitoring runs as built-in service within existing `heimdall-mcp` containers
- **Process Management**: Python multiprocessing with PID file tracking and signal handling
- **Health Monitoring**: Service status included in container health check system
- **Resource Management**: Memory/CPU monitoring with configurable thresholds

### Configuration Options

`CognitiveConfig` provides monitoring parameters:

```python
# File monitoring configuration
monitoring_enabled: bool = True
monitoring_interval_seconds: float = 5.0
monitoring_batch_size: int = 10
monitoring_ignore_patterns: Set[str] = {'.git', 'node_modules', '__pycache__'}

# File synchronization configuration
sync_enabled: bool = True
sync_atomic_operations: bool = True
sync_continue_on_error: bool = True
sync_max_retry_attempts: int = 3
sync_retry_delay_seconds: float = 1.0
```

### Memory Source Path Querying

SQLite persistence provides source path querying capabilities:

- **`get_memories_by_source_path()`**: Efficiently query memories by source file path
- **`delete_memories_by_source_path()`**: Atomic deletion of all memories from a specific file
- **JSON Indexing**: Performance-optimized indexes on `context_metadata.source_path` field
- **Partial Indexing**: Only indexes rows where source_path exists for efficiency

### CLI Integration

```bash
# Monitoring service management
memory_system monitor start        # Start monitoring service
memory_system monitor stop         # Stop monitoring service
memory_system monitor restart      # Restart monitoring service
memory_system monitor status       # Check service status
memory_system monitor health       # Detailed health check

# Health check integration
memory_system doctor               # Includes monitoring service validation
```

### Data Flow

```
Container Startup → MonitoringService (daemon) → MarkdownFileMonitor (polling) → FileSyncHandler → CognitiveSystem
                                ↓                                                      ↓
File System Changes → FileChangeEvent → FileSyncHandler → LoaderRegistry → MemoryLoader → Memory Operations
                                ↓
Container Health Check ← Service Status ← Error Recovery ← Statistics Tracking
```

### File Change Detection Behavior

**Initial Scan Behavior**: When the monitoring service starts, it performs an initial directory scan to populate its internal file state tracking (`_file_states` dictionary) but **does NOT generate ADDED events for pre-existing files**. This means:

- ✅ **Existing files are tracked** for future change detection (modifications/deletions)
- ❌ **Existing files are NOT processed** into memory during container startup
- ✅ **New files created after startup** will trigger ADDED events and be processed
- ✅ **Modified files** will trigger MODIFIED events and be reprocessed (delete + reload)
- ✅ **Deleted files** will trigger DELETED events and have their memories removed

**File State Persistence**: File states are stored only in memory and are **not persisted** across container restarts. Each container restart requires a fresh initial scan.

**Memory Awareness**: The monitoring system is **purely file-based** and has no awareness of existing memories in the cognitive system. It only tracks file system state (mtime, size, existence) and does not query or consider what memories may already exist for tracked files.

**Implications for Container Restarts**:
- Pre-existing markdown files will be tracked but not reprocessed after container restart
- Only files that change after the container starts will trigger memory synchronization
- To ensure all markdown files are loaded into memory, use manual loading commands before enabling monitoring

### Component Interaction

The monitoring system uses a three-layer architecture:

1. **Detection Layer**: MarkdownFileMonitor watches for markdown file changes using polling
2. **Coordination Layer**: FileSyncHandler receives change events and orchestrates sync operations
3. **Loading Layer**: LoaderRegistry auto-selects appropriate MemoryLoader for file-to-memory conversion

This separation allows markdown-specific file monitoring while maintaining generic, extensible memory loading capabilities for future file types.

## Modular Component Architecture

### Component Responsibilities

The refactored markdown processing system follows the single responsibility principle with these specialized components:

#### 1. ContentAnalyzer (`content_analyzer.py`)
- **Purpose**: Linguistic analysis and content classification
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Token counting and content validation
  - Code section detection and analysis
  - Memory type classification (conceptual, procedural, contextual)
  - Content meaningfulness assessment
  - spaCy-based linguistic feature extraction

#### 2. DocumentParser (`document_parser.py`)
- **Purpose**: Markdown parsing and hierarchical tree construction
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Markdown header parsing and hierarchy building
  - Document tree construction with proper nesting
  - Position tracking for structural analysis
  - Content extraction and organization

#### 3. MemoryFactory (`memory_factory.py`)
- **Purpose**: Memory creation and content assembly
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Contextual content assembly with hierarchical paths
  - Code context enhancement and merging
  - Memory chunk creation with proper metadata
  - Content truncation and optimization

#### 4. ConnectionExtractor (`connection_extractor.py`)
- **Purpose**: Relationship analysis between memories
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Hierarchical connection detection (parent-child relationships)
  - Sequential connection analysis (step-by-step procedures)
  - Associative connection scoring (semantic similarity)
  - Relevance score calculation using multiple factors

#### 5. ChunkProcessor (`chunk_processor.py`)
- **Purpose**: Document chunking and intelligent grouping
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Tree-to-memory conversion with contextual awareness
  - Intelligent grouping of small sections
  - Memory consolidation and optimization
  - Token threshold management

#### 6. MarkdownMemoryLoader (`markdown_loader.py`)
- **Purpose**: Main coordinator orchestrating all components
- **Responsibilities**:
  - Component initialization and dependency injection
  - High-level processing workflow coordination
  - Interface compliance with MemoryLoader abstract base
  - Error handling and logging coordination

### Component Interaction Flow

```
MarkdownMemoryLoader (Coordinator)
    ↓
DocumentParser → Hierarchical Tree
    ↓
ContentAnalyzer → Content Classification
    ↓
ChunkProcessor → Memory Chunks
    ↓
MemoryFactory → Enhanced Memories
    ↓
ConnectionExtractor → Memory Relationships
    ↓
Return: (memories, connections)
```

### Benefits of Modular Architecture

1. **Single Responsibility**: Each component has a clear, focused purpose
2. **Testability**: Components can be tested independently with mocks
3. **Maintainability**: Changes to one component don't affect others
4. **Reusability**: Components can be reused in different contexts
5. **Extensibility**: New components can be added without affecting existing ones
6. **Code Quality**: Eliminates duplication and reduces complexity

### Backward Compatibility

The refactoring maintains full backward compatibility:
- Public API of MarkdownMemoryLoader remains unchanged
- All existing tests continue to pass (53/53)
- Integration points with CognitiveSystem unchanged
- Configuration parameters remain the same
